"Maker methodologies and arguments for the ascent of the DIY research agenda"

Digital humanities scholars can either build the cyberinfrastructure they want or be forever constrained by the ideas, policies, tools, and services bequeathed to them by non-humanist domains. The pragmatic reasons not to "make" are long, including a paucity of readily available resources, expertise, and rewards. For such projects, digital humanists typically need to collaborate across disciplines and with industry practitioners. They also usually need to raise significant external funds. Recognition within current academic systems for such collaboration and community engagement can be diffused or even disregarded when related to tenure and promotion. Yet, as Lynch (2014) also argued, digital humanists must overcome these issues and lead this type of cyberinfrastructure development, because they alone can judge the usefulness of technologies in the field and guide their related scholarly innovations. Digital humanists who single-handedly can write code, mark up data, construct databases, design interfaces, write grants, manage projects, and provide expert content as well as teach, publish, and serve on numerous university committees are extremely rare (Reed, 2014). Therefore, much of the core content and future of computing inherently will be multidisciplinary, collaborative, and understood through mixed methods (Rosenbloom, 2012). Porsdam (2013) argued, in turn, the “read-only” ethos of traditional humanities needs to be replaced with a “read/write/rewrite” approach, rooted in making and integrating processes of design and creation of “the experiential, the social, and the communal,” as Burdick et al. (2012, p. 83) described.  A good argument can be made that – whether the current power brokers like it or not – we are leaving the era of scholarship based upon the individual author’s generation of the “great book” and entering the era of collaborative authoring of the “great project.” This presentation will highlight some of the key issues that arise during these kinds of participatory and collaborative scholarly projects, with the intent to start discussions about ways in which academics can navigate these often bumpy terrains and prepare themselves for the persistent challenges of pursuing a DIY DH research agenda.

Bio: Brett Oppegaard, PhD, an assistant professor in the School of Communications at University of Hawaii at Manoa, studies ubiquitous computing and mobile media. He was the individual recipient of the regional and national 2012 George and Helen Hartzog Award for his research into mobile app development and media delivery systems within the National Park Service as well as the national 2013 John Wesley Powell Prize winner for outstanding achievement in the field of historical displays. He was chosen for a National Endowment for the Arts fellowship as a journalist and also has earned National Endowment for the Humanities’ grants as a scholar for his innovative mobile media research projects. Those projects include collaborations with America’s first national park, Yellowstone, and the National Park Service’s Harpers Ferry Center, the Interpretive Design Center of the federal agency.    